SOURCE: https://library.municode.com/nj/jersey_city/codes/code_of_ordinances?nodeId=CH260RECO
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04 03:58 UTC

Chapter 260  RENT CONTROL

§ 260-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS—Fit for habitation as defined by the statutes, codes and ordinances in full force and effect in the State of New Jersey, County of Hudson and City of Jersey City, and occupied or unoccupied and offered for rent. 
BASE RENT—The legal rent charged or actually received by the landlord for the rental of a housing space as of January 11, 1983; or if not occupied at that date the "base rent" shall be that actually charged to and received from the previous tenant, plus any increases under § 260-3 of this chapter or the ordinance to which this is an amendment, or if insufficient evidence is available from which the Rent Leveling Administrator or Board can determine the legal rent charged or actually received as provided above, then the Rent Leveling Administrator and Board have the power to determine the legal "base rent" by considering the legal base rent of other units, subject to the provisions of this chapter, which are comparable in size, location and facilities to the subject unit. 
[Amended 4-27-1989 by Ord. No. C-944]
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT—A permanent improvement that adds to value or substantially extends the useful life of the landlord's property and can be claimed by the landlord for depreciation on his or her federal tax returns. Specifically excluded are ordinary repairs, maintenance and conversion to heat/hot water units for individual apartments where the cost of providing the heat/hot water service is transferred from the landlord to the tenant. 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX—The consumer price index (all items, base year 1967 = 100) for the region of the United States of which Jersey City is a part, published periodically by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
DWELLING—Any building or other structures containing housing spaces rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants consisting of a household or family as defined in this chapter. A dwelling includes buildings or structures that are exempt from the restrictions of rent increases mandated under this chapter. 
[Amended 10-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-137; 6-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-080; 5-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-036; 9-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-067; 12-2-2020 by Ord. No. 20-100; 3-10-2021 by Ord. No. 21-013]
A.	Exempt from this definition are: 
1.	Dwellings with four or less housing spaces; provided, however, that this exemption shall be suspended for non-owner occupied dwellings with four or less housing spaces until the end of the state of emergency or six months from adoption of these amendments whichever comes first. This paragraph shall be effective March 15, 2021. 
2.	Licensed hotels or motels and commercial and industrial space. 
3.	Newly constructed dwellings with 25 or more dwelling units located within a redevelopment area as defined in Section 5 of the Redevelopment Agencies Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55C-5(o), for which the City Council has approved a redevelopment plan, in accordance with Section 17 of the Redevelopment Agencies Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55C-17.
4.	Low rent public housing developments. 
5.	All buildings or structures, hotels, motels or guesthouses which are converted from any previous use as a nonpermanent dwelling to use as a dwelling on or after October 1, 1983. For the purpose of this exemption, a building shall be deemed converted for use as a dwelling on the date on which the certificate of occupancy for dwelling use is issued. 
B.	Any new dwelling or housing spaces being rented for the first time for the initial rental only. 
EQUITY IN REAL PROPERTY INVESTMENT—The actual cash contribution of the purchaser at the time of closing of Title and any principal payments to outstanding mortgages subsequent to acquisition of title by the purchaser. 
FAIR RETURN—The percentage of return on equity of real property investment. The amount of return shall be measured by the net income before depreciation. A "fair return" on the equity investment in real property shall be considered to be 2.5% above the maximum passbook demand deposit savings account interest rate available in the municipality. 
[Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 19-044]
HOUSING SPACE—Includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered for rent for living and dwelling purposes with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such portion of the real property. 
JUST CAUSE FOR EVICTION—That the landlord recovered possession of a housing space or dwelling for one of the reasons outlined in State law (N.J.S.A. 2A:18-53 as amended or N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1 et seq.). 
LANDLORD REGISTRATION STATEMENT—A statement to be completed and filed with the Bureau of Rent Leveling pursuant to § 260-2 E, F and G by all owner(s) and landlord(s) of housing spaces and/or dwellings in the City of Jersey City. 
[Added 10-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-137]
LIVING AREA—The amount of total rentable space applicable to any given housing space, measured either in terms of rooms or square footage. 
RENT—Any price for the use of a housing space. It includes any charge, no matter how set forth, paid by the tenant for the use of any service in connection with the housing space. Security deposits and charges for accessories, such as boats, mobile homes and automobiles, not used in connection with the housing space shall not be construed as "rent." No charges shall be permitted for late rent, whether termed a late rental fee or interest on rent paid late, in excess of $35.00, returned check fees in excess of $35.00, or any other similar charges; provided, however, that no landlord may collect any penalty or interest, however defined, for late payment of rent until the end of the state of emergency or six months from adoption of these amendments whichever comes first. This paragraph shall be effective March 15, 2021. 
[Amended 2-27-02 by Ord. No. 02-017; 5-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-036; 9-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-067; 12-2-2020 by Ord. No. 20-100; 3-10-2021 by Ord. No. 21-013]
RENTAL STATEMENT—The statement a landlord shall be required to sign and deliver to each tenant at the inception of the tenancy, identifying the name and address of the landlord and his or her agent, if any, identifying the name, address and telephone number of the superintendent, if any, providing a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone number for the landlord or his or her agent, describing the housing space rented, the related services and equipment involved (whether or not including use of basement, garage, clothesline, washing equipment, utilities, heat, hot water, garbage removal, repairs, maintenance and the like) as of January 11, 1973; and the base rental as of the date of the inception of the tenancy; and the rent of the prior tenant and notification of the existence of the rent registration law. 
SERVICE—The provision of light, heat, hot water, maintenance, painting, elevator service, air conditioning, storm windows, screens, superintendent service and any other benefit, privilege or facility connected with the use or occupancy of any dwelling or housing space. 
SERVICE SURCHARGE—An additional charge over and above the rental due for new or additional services. 
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE HEALTH AND MAINTENANCE CODES—The housing space and dwelling are free from the major health, safety and fire hazards as well as in compliance with heat and hot water and sanitary requirements. Compliance is to be determined with the aid of appropriate City and State regulatory agencies based upon current code inspection reports which shall be not less than six months old at the time of the initial hearing on a rent increase application under § 260-10, Hardship rental increases, and § 260-5, Capital improvements. 
[Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183]

§ 260-2. Rent leveling; landlord registration statement; answering devices.
[Amended 10-24-12 by Ord. No. 12-137]
A.	Establishment of rents between a landlord and tenant in housing space in dwellings to which this chapter is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of this amended section. 
B.	Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or termination of a periodic lease shall be void. Any rental increase in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this chapter shall be void. 
C.	All rents for rental of housing space and services in dwellings to which this chapter is applicable are hereby controlled at the base rent level received by the landlord as of January 11, 1973, and no rental increases shall be hereinafter demanded, paid or accepted, except as provided in this chapter. 
D.	Any rent increase imposed after January 11, 1973, the date of expiration of federal rent controls, to the extent that such increase is in excess of that which is permitted by this chapter, is hereby declared to be null and void and such excess rent shall be refunded or credited by the landlord forthwith. 
E.	Existing leases and options to renew shall not be affected by this chapter but no new leases shall be executed or performed except as provided in this chapter, and the base rent level in leased housing space shall be the rental in effect at the expiration of the lease. 
F.	Landlord Registration Statement Requirement. 
[Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050; 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-137]
(1)	Every owner and/or landlord shall within 90 days following the effective date of this subsection or the creation of the first tenancy in any dwelling containing five (5) or more housing spaces, whether or not subject to the restrictions of rent increases under this Chapter, file a landlord registration statement with the Bureau of Rent Leveling containing the following information: 
(a)	The name and address of the record owner or owners of the dwelling and the record owner or owners of the rental business if not the same person. 
(b)	If the record owner is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent and corporate officers of the corporation. 
(c)	If the address of any record owner or owners is not located in the County of Hudson, the name and address of a person who resides in the County of Hudson or has an office in the County of Hudson and is authorized to accept notices from tenants and to issue receipts for notices from tenants and to accept service of process on behalf of the record owner or owners. 
(d)	The name and address of the managing agent of the dwelling, if any. 
(e)	The name and address, including the dwelling unit, apartment or room number of the superintendent, janitor, custodian or any other individual employed by the record owner or managing agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any. 
(f)	The name, address and telephone number of any individual representative of the record owner or managing agent who may be called at any time in case of an emergency affecting the dwelling or any housing space within the dwelling, including such emergencies as the failure of any essential service or system, and who has the authority to make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair to the building or expenditure in connection with the building. 
(g)	A list of the base monthly rents of each housing space, by apartment or room number, within the dwelling as of January 1, 1983. 
(2)	Between January 1 and March 3 of each calendar year, all owners and/or landlords of dwellings shall file with the Bureau of Rent Leveling a new landlord registration statement for each dwelling owned. An owner and/or landlord who purchases a dwelling on or after April 1 of any year shall also file a landlord registration statement within seven (7) days of purchase. Owner(s) and/or landlord(s) entitled to an increase in the base rent as a result of improving vacant housing space shall immediately file an amended landlord registration statement. 
G.	Within 30 days following the effective date of this subsection and at the time of the creation of a new tenancy, every landlord subject to this chapter shall provide each occupant or tenant in his or her dwelling a written statement containing all of the information required to be filed with the Bureau of Rent Leveling in accordance with Subsection F. Commencing 30 days following the effective date of this subsection, this information shall be posted at all times in the lobby, hallway or other conspicuous place within the dwelling. If any information contained in the statement changes, the landlord shall inform each occupant or tenant of the change in writing within 30 days and correct the information posted within seven days after the change. 
[Added 6-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-050]
H.	From November 1 through March 31 of each year, the telephone numbers of the record owner, any individual representative of the record owner, the managing agent and the corporate officers, if the owner is a corporation, shall be equipped with an answering device capable of receiving and recording messages from any tenant calling with regard to maintenance. Owners have 30 days from the effective date of this act to comply with this requirement. 
[Added 2-11-1988 by Ord. No. C-674]

§ 260-3. Allowable increases.
[Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183]
A.	At the expiration of a lease or at the termination of a lease of a periodic tenant, no landlord of any dwelling as defined in § 260-1 may request or receive a percentage increase in rent which is greater than four percent or the percentage difference between the consumer price index three months prior to the expiration or termination of the lease and three months prior to the commencement of the lease term, whichever is less. For a periodic tenant or for a tenant whose lease term shall be less than one year, said tenant shall not suffer or be caused to pay more than one rent increase in any 12-month period, commencing 15 months prior to and ending three months prior to, the effective date of the proposed increase, whichever is less. However, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, no landlord may request or receive any rental increase at the expiration of a lease or the expiration of any periodic tenancy until the end of the state of emergency or six months from adoption of these amendments, whichever comes first. This paragraph shall be effective March 15, 2021. 
[Amended 5-6-2020 by Ord. No. 20-036; 9-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-067; 12-2-2020 by Ord. No. 20-100; 3-10-2021 by Ord. No. 21-013]
B.	No more than one such cost-of-living rental increase in any one twelve-month period shall be permitted irrespective of the number of different tenants occupying said housing space during said 12-month period. 
C.	Vacant space. 
[Amended 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116]
(1)	In the event of a vacant housing space, the landlord may raise the rental above the cost-of-living increase without prior application being made to the Bureau of Rent Leveling, and only if he or she has made capital improvements to the housing space. Such capital improvements will entitle the landlord to increase the base rent of the vacant unit by the following amount: 
(a)	For capital improvements up to $5,000.00 in value, the vacant unit's monthly base rent shall be increased by $1.35 per $100.00 of improvement; and 
(b)	For capital improvements in excess of $5,000.00, the vacant unit's monthly base rent shall increase by $1.55 per $100.00 of improvement. 
(2)	It shall be the sole responsibility of the landlord to register the new rent of any improved unit with the Division of Tenant/Landlord Relations pursuant to § 260-2 of this chapter. No capital improvements shall be recognized under this provision unless they are made in accordance with applicable city codes and the appropriate permits are obtained. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to document to the Bureau of Rent Leveling and prove the cost of any capital improvements in vacant housing space for which he or she desires to increase the rental. 
(3)	The landlord seeking a rent increase under this subsection shall pay an application fee of $75.00 per unit. 
D.	The landlord shall supply the following information in writing to any new tenant within the first 10 days of a new tenant's tenancy: the name of and rent paid by all tenants who occupied the apartment rented by the new tenant during the prior 12 months. The landlord shall keep a written record of the information described herein. The landlord shall make this record available to the Rent Leveling Administrator or Board upon request. 
E.	It shall be unlawful for any landlord to charge a tenant for the use of a washing machine, refrigerator, cooking stove, air conditioner or any other appliances wherever such appliances were permitted and allowed by the landlord without extra charge. The use of such appliances shall be considered as included in the former rents. Any such extra charge in such situation shall be considered as an unauthorized increase in rents and shall be unlawful unless approved by the Rent Leveling Board. Any landlord who has heretofore charged for such appliances shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be liable for punishment as such. 
F.	Any landlord seeking a major capital improvement rent increase based upon a substantial improvement of the dwelling and/or housing space must include in the notice to the tenant a landlord certification that said dwelling and housing space is in substantial compliance as defined by this chapter. All work done on the structure and premises must have been with approval of the appropriate agency or department as evidenced by requisite permits. The completed construction must be in accord with building, fire and other code regulations. A certificate of occupancy, where required by law, and a certificate of code compliance, including a housing inspection report based upon an actual inspection made within six months of the date of the landlord's application, must be produced as evidence. For the purpose of this section only, "substantial improvement" shall mean that the cost of the capital improvements exceeds 50% of the current assessed value, as adjusted to 100% by the county tax equalization ratio prior to the improvements being made. 
(1)	If a landlord is determined to be in substantial compliance the increase shall be payable from the date set forth in the original notice of rent increase. 
(2)	If a landlord is determined not to be in substantial compliance at the time of the hearing, then the Board may grant provisional approval for the capital improvement and rent increase with such approval to be reviewed within six months. In the event that the subject property is brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period, then the provisional approval shall become final. 
(3)	In the event that the subject property is not brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period, but the owner has within this period made significant progress toward substantial compliance, the provisional approval shall continue with a further review being scheduled within the following three months. If the property is brought into substantial compliance within the additional three months, the provisional approval shall become final. 
(4)	In the event that the owner has not brought the property into substantial compliance or made significant progress toward substantial compliance within the six-month initial period or fails to bring the property into substantial compliance after being accorded the additional three-month extension, the owner provisional approval shall terminate and any capital improvement rent increase collected shall be immediately refunded to the tenant who paid the increase. 
(5)	Any capital improvement rent increase approved pursuant to this section shall take effect from the date of determination by the Board upon proper notice as required by the laws of the State of New Jersey. 
G.	Any landlord seeking a hardship increase shall include with the application an actual inspection report from the local building or property maintenance department based upon an inspection made within six months prior to the application. An application without said inspection report shall be void. The hearing officer may request an inspection if no inspection report is included in such application. The determination of substantial compliance shall be made by the Rent Leveling Board upon reviewing the list of violations, if any, set forth in the inspection report. If there are any objections thereto, then either party may file a complaint with the Board and a hearing shall be scheduled. The Chairperson of the Board shall intervene whenever necessary, upon request of any party to an application, to assure a prompt inspection by the appropriate department. 
(1)	If a landlord is determined to be in substantial compliance, then the hardship request shall be processed subject to the requirements set forth in § 260-10 of this chapter. 
(2)	If a landlord is determined not to be in substantial compliance at the time of the hearing on the hardship application, and the Board determines, after hearing, that the application would otherwise be granted, then the Board may grant provisional approval for the hardship application with such approval to be reviewed within six months. In the event that the subject property is brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period, then the provisional approval shall become final. 
(3)	In the event that the subject property is not brought into substantial compliance within the six-month period but the owner has, within this period, made significant progress toward substantial compliance, the provisional approval shall continue with a further review being scheduled within the following three months. If the property is brought into substantial compliance within the additional three months, the provisional approval shall become final. 
(4)	In the event that the owner has not brought the property into substantial compliance or made significant progress toward substantial compliance within the six-month initial period or fails to bring the property into substantial compliance after being accorded the additional three-month extension, the owner's provisional approval shall terminate and any rent increase collected shall be immediately refunded to the tenant who paid the increase. In the event that a provisional approval is so terminated, the Board shall dismiss the hardship application. An owner whose application has been so dismissed may reapply for a hardship rental increase. Any reapplication shall be considered an original application under § 260-10. 
[Amended 4-23-1987 by Ord. No. C-451]
H.	The landlord shall register the rent roll with the Rent Leveling Bureau in order to qualify for any rental increase. 
I.	If the landlord does not inform or misinforms the tenant concerning the rent paid by the prior tenants or in any manner illegally increases the tenant's rent, the Rent Leveling Bureau shall then accept, hear and adjudicate a compliance of an illegal increase. 
J.	The landlord shall provide to each tenant a copy of the Truth-In-Renting Statement and subsequent amendments to said statement and be in full compliance with the landlord identity disclosure provision contained within the statement in order to qualify for any rental increase. 

§ 260-4. Procedure for cost-of-living increases.
Any landlord seeking a cost-of-living rental increase shall notify the tenant in writing at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the increase as required by law of the calculations involved in computing the increase, including the consumer price index three months prior to the expiration or termination of the lease and the commencement of the lease term, or for a periodic tenant whose lease term is less than one year, the consumer price index 15 months prior to the effective date of the proposed increase, the allowable percentage increase as per § 260-3 and the allowable rental increase. The notice shall state the tenant's right to contest the increase within six months to the Jersey City Rent Leveling Bureau. 

§ 260-5. Capital improvement and service charge.
A.	[Amended 3-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-013] A landlord may apply to the Bureau of Rent Leveling for a service charge for increased or improved services. The landlord shall submit a written proposal with cost estimates to the Rent Leveling Board prior to performing any major or capital improvement work, showing how the work will affect all dwelling units. The landlord shall include the substance of said proposal in the notice of application to each tenant sent pursuant to Subsection C of this section. The aforesaid notice shall advise the tenants that they have a right to request a hearing before the Rent Leveling Board with respect to the proposed capital improvement work. Final approval by the Board shall not be considered until the capital improvement work has been completed and after the Board has received necessary documentation, at which time a final hearing will be scheduled. The landlord shall compute the average cost of the computed capital improvement or service by the number of years of useful life of the improvement as claimed by the landlord for federal income tax depreciation purposes. The landlord shall propose to apportion the average cost of completed improvement or service per year of useful life among the tenants in the dwelling in accordance with one of the following methods: 
(1)	If the capital improvement benefits certain housing spaces only, then the cost of those improvements shall be surcharged to only these units. 
(2)	If the capital improvement benefits all housing spaces but in varying degrees according to the amount of living area of each housing space, then the cost for the improvements shall be charged according to either the number of rooms or the space in proportion to the total rentable area in the dwelling. 
(3)	If the capital improvement is equally beneficial to all housing spaces regardless of the living area within any housing space, then the cost of the improvements shall be charged according to the number of housing spaces within the dwelling. 
B.	All work done on the property must be performed with the appropriate proper local approval as evidenced by permits and the completed capital improvements must be in accord with building, fire, plumbing, electrical and any other code regulations. Before any capital increase is approved, an inspection shall be required to be made by a qualified inspector of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce together with an inspection by the Office of the Construction Official in order to document the nature of the work performed and that the structure is in substantial compliance. A certificate of occupancy must be secured if required by law. The landlord shall furnish with the application a certification of the true cost of each improvement signed by a qualified inspector and an affidavit by the landlord that the amount claimed in the application is attributable only to the specific building which is the subject of the application. 
[Amended 3-11-1992 by Ord. No. 92-013; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052]
C.	Notice procedure. Prior to any application under this section, the landlord shall serve upon each tenant, by registered or certified mail or personal service of a notice of application filing setting forth the basis for said application, the amount of rental increase or surcharge applied for with respect to that tenant and the calculations involved. A sample copy of such notice shall be filed with the application of the landlord together with an affidavit or certification of service of notice of application upon each tenant. Tenants who request a copy of the complete application shall have one provided by the landlord. 
D.	Determination. The Rent Leveling Board may grant the landlord a rental surcharge or increase under the provisions of this section. No landlord shall impose upon any tenant a rent surcharge or increase under this section without first obtaining approval from the Rent Leveling Board. It shall be within the discretion of the Board to fix the effective date of any approval of a rental surcharge or increase to be at any reasonable time after determination. A surcharge granted under the provisions of this section shall not be considered rent for purposes of computing cost-of-living rental increases pursuant to §§ 260-2, 260-3 and 260-4. After the landlord has filed his or her application for an increase with all supporting documents and materials, no new material will be considered by the Hearing Officer or Board unless such new material is filed with the Board and notice identifying such new material and setting forth a description of such material is served upon each tenant no later than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Tenants who request a copy of the capital improvement file and any new materials submitted to the Board or hearing officer shall have one provided by the landlord at least five days prior to any hearing date. 
[Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183]
E.	Computations. 
(1)	A landlord must provide as part of his or her application a completed Rent Leveling Board form indicating the method and term of depreciation of the capital improvements claimed by the landlord. 
(2)	In the case of all capital improvements, the depreciation period shall be calculated according to its useful life, which in no case shall exceed 10 years for major capital improvements and five years for minor capital improvements. 
[Amended 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116]
(3)	In the case of such major capital improvements, the capital improvement charge shall be a part of the permanent base rent. 
[Amended 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116]
(4)	Major capital improvements shall consist of a substantial change in the housing accommodations such as would materially increase the rental value in a normal market and which consists of capital improvements to building-wide operating systems, including but not limited to items such as complete plumbing or electrical replacement for the entire building or a complete new roof. Major capital improvements shall also include complete kitchen and bathroom replacements for an individual apartment unit. 
(5)	In the case of minor capital improvements, the capital improvement charge shall not be a part of the permanent base rent, nor shall any financing costs be included as part of said surcharge. 
(6)	Minor capital improvements shall consist of all capital improvements not classified as major capital improvements. 
(7)	A capital improvement increase resulting hereunder shall not exceed 15% of the legal rent for the first year of such increase. Any further amount of increase which would have resulted based upon the landlord's application hereunder shall be apportioned equally over the remaining period of the capital improvement charge. 
(8)	Except in the case of emergency capital improvements, as defined in Subsection G, a landlord shall be entitled to only one major capital improvement increase in any twelve-month period. 
F.	The Board, in computing the amount spent for capital improvements, may consider the reasonable value of construction services performed by the owner in the actual capital improvement work. Where allowed, this shall include professional consultation or other similar services of the owner and is limited to actual labor and materials invested by the owner. 
G.	In the case of emergency major capital improvements a landlord shall not be required to obtain Board approval prior to performing said capital improvement work. The landlord shall be required to obtain Board approval for any capital improvement charge after the capital improvement work has been completed as otherwise provided for capital improvement charges herein. For purposes of this section, "emergency capital improvement" shall mean a capital improvement made to correct a condition causing immediate and/or imminent danger to the health or safety of occupants of the subject premises, as defined by the Division of Construction Code Official, Department of Public Safety and/or Building Department. The landlord shall notify the Division of Construction Code Official of this condition as soon as possible. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; [9-11-2013 by Ord. No. 13-081] 

§ 260-6. Exemptions for new dwellings and new housing space and for dwellings vacant as of July 1, 1998. [Amended 4-27-1989 by Ord. No. C-944; 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 95-111; 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052; 5-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-060; 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116]
A.	The owner of a newly constructed dwelling and the owner of newly constructed housing space which is rented for the first time shall not be restricted in the initial rent charged, provided that the owner has registered the rent with the Bureau of Rent Leveling. Except as provided in Subsection C of this section, any subsequent rental increases shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.	Permits as required by law are to be secured from all agencies having control and jurisdiction. All work must adhere to appropriate code standards and must be inspected by all agencies having control and jurisdiction and their approval obtained. A certificate of occupancy must be secured as required by law. 
C.	In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq., L. 1987, c. 153, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a new dwelling which is constructed between June 25, 1987, through June 25, 1992, and which is not constructed for occupation by senior citizens, for a period of time not to exceed the period of amortization of any initial mortgage loan obtained for the dwelling, or for 30 years following completion of construction, whichever is less. This exemption applies only where an owner complied with all requirements contained in N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq., including the filing with the municipal construction official required by N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.4 and the service of a written statement upon the tenant required by N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.3. 
D.	Buyers of multifamily dwellings covered by this chapter which are certified by the Division of Tenant/Landlord Relations to be vacant as of July 1, 1998 shall be granted a permanent exemption from the mandates of this chapter for rental units within that dwelling. Officers designated by the Director of the Division of Tenant/Landlord Relations shall be responsible for certifying, in writing, that a dwelling is vacant as of July 1, 1998. 

§ 260-7. Anti-harassment and tenant complaints. [Amended 9-10-1987 by Ord. No. C-553; 8-12-1998 by Ord. No. 98-116]
A.	Any tenants desiring to remain in their units may do so without provocation or retaliation from landlords. For the purpose of this section, harassment of tenants shall mean conduct, whether direct or indirect, committed intentionally or negligently, by a landlord or anyone acting on his behalf. These actions include, but are not limited. 
(1)	A reduction in the quality of basic service to the health, safety and welfare of the tenants; 
(2)	Withholding heat or hot water; 
(3)	Inadequate security; 
(4)	Intermittent failures; 
(5)	Bothersome telephone calls or letters; 
(6)	Frivolous eviction threats or legal proceeding; or 
(7)	Actions which would cause a reasonable person of like age and physical condition of a tenant to, fear for his or her life, limb, property or home. 
B.	Investigation/prosecution of harassment complaints. The Housing Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over such complaints. The city shall assign one of its municipal prosecutors to investigate and/or prosecute complaints involving harassment filed by either tenants or landlords. Any landlord found guilty of violating this section shall be liable for a fine of up to $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a period of up to 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. 
C.	Any complaint of an illegal increase or claim to lower rentals must be filed with the Bureau of Rent Leveling no later than two years after the effective date of the disputed increase. This limitations period shall apply to all claims accruing on or after January 1, 1987. 
D.	Payment of rental increase for two consecutive years shall be construed to be an agreed increase and not subject to the provisions of this chapter except that in the event that the Board determines that the landlord has not served upon the tenant the rental statement set forth in § 260-1, the Board shall waive the two-year limitations period. 
E.	If at any time after 30 days of a determination by the Rent Leveling Board or Administrator resulting in a refund of moneys to the tenant the landlord has not paid the refund to the tenant, the tenant may deduct the refund from the next rental payment. 
F.	Rent charges by the landlord shall be reduced or rolled back for any one of the following reasons if so determined by the Rent Leveling Board or Administrator: 
(1)	For the reasons set forth in § 260-14 of this chapter. 
(2)	For an unapproved rent increase beyond the annual cost-of-living increase. 
G.	An individual tenant or group of tenants on behalf of a tenant in the subject premises may file a complaint for a rent rollback based upon the foregoing reasons or any other reason where the value of the housing space is reduced. 
H.	At the time of any complaint made pursuant to Subsection G, the tenant or group of tenants on behalf of a tenant in the subject premises may request an inspection from the local housing or property maintenance department, which department shall undertake the inspection, submit a report and be available to the Rent Leveling Board at the hearing. 
I.	Any rent reduction, if granted by the Board, shall remain in effect until the landlord proves to the Board that the deficiency has been corrected. 
J.	The Board shall adopt guidelines for rent reductions under this section and shall consider the type of deficiency, the cause of deficiency, steps taken to alleviate the deficiency and the severity of the deficiency. 

§ 260-8. Bureau of Rent Leveling. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 97-052]
A.	There is established within the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce a Bureau of Rent Leveling, the head of which shall be the Rent Leveling Administrator. The Rent Leveling Administrator shall possess all the qualifications necessary to administer this chapter and the Bureau of Rent Leveling but shall not function as a hearing officer. 
B.	The Rent Leveling Administrator shall be appointed by and under the direction of the Director of the Department of Housing, Economic Development and Commerce. 

§ 260-9. Powers and duties of the Bureau of Rent Leveling. [Amended 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-137]
A.	The Bureau of Rent Leveling under the direction of the Rent Leveling Administrator shall have the following powers and functions: 
(1)	To remedy violations of this chapter by adjusting rentals, ordering rebates and bringing appropriate legal charges as provided in this chapter. 
(2)	To accept complaints from tenants of illegal increases, provided that all claims are sworn to and acknowledged by a person authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(3)	To accept any applications from landlords for rental increases under the capital improvement and service surcharge provisions of this chapter, provided that all applications are sworn to and acknowledged by a person authorized by law to administer oaths. 
(4)	To review applications and investigate complaints prior to a final decision being made in any case. 
(5)	To correct rentals which violate the consumer price index. 
(6)	To accept and forward to the Rent Leveling Board any applications for hardship rental increases. 
B.	Any rebate ordered by the Rent Leveling Administrator or Rent Leveling Board shall be considered a penalty against the landlord if said rebate is not made to the tenant within 30 days of the service of a final determination by the Administrator or Board. The tenant may bring an action in Municipal Court for the collection of this penalty after the time allowed as provided in New Jersey Court Rules, 4:70-1. 
C.	Either party to a case shall have the right to appeal the determination of the Rent Leveling Administrator or Board's hearing officer to the Rent Leveling Board. 
D.	There is hereby established the schedule of fees for complaints, applications and landlord registration statement to the Rent Leveling Board, which fees shall be payable to the City of Jersey City as provided in Chapter 160, Fees and Charges. [Amended 10-23-1986 by Ord. No. C-321; Amended 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-137] 
(1)	$125 per housing space for capital improvement to vacant housing spaces. 
(2)	$20 per housing space for major or minor capital improvements. 
(3)	$30 per housing space for hardship application. 
(4)	$10 per housing space for the filing of landlord registration statement for all dwellings with five (5) or more housing spaces, including dwellings that are exempt from the restrictions of rent increases mandated under this Chapter, during each registration event. 
(5)	$30 per housing space for condominium and cooperative conversions. 
(6)	$150 per housing space for appeal of a protected tenancy determination. 
E.	No complaint application or rent roll registration will be deemed filed with the Board unless and until submitted on the Board's official forms and accompanied by all appropriate supporting documents and information and the required filing fees. 

§ 260-10. Hardship rental increases. [Amended 3-13-1986 by Ord. No. C-183]
A.	In the event that a landlord cannot meet his or her mortgage payments or operating expenses or does not make a fair return on his or her investment, he or she may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for increased rentals, provided that he or she has owned the building for at least nine months prior to the time he or she applies for an increase. 
B.	Notice procedure prior to any application under this section to the Board. The landlord shall serve upon each tenant by registered or certified mail or personal service a notice of said application setting forth the basis for said application, the amount of rental increases applied for with respect to that tenant and the calculations involved. A sample copy of such notice shall be filed with the application of the landlord to the Board, together with an affidavit or certification of service of notice of application upon each tenant. No hearing shall commence earlier than 6:00 p.m. and no hearing shall continue beyond 12:00 midnight. 
[Amended 6-26-1991 by Ord. No. MC-334]
C.	Determination by Rent Leveling Board. The Board may grant the landlord a rental increase under the provisions of this section. No landlord shall impose upon any tenant an increase in rent under this section without first obtaining approval from the Board. It shall be within the discretion of the Board to fix the effective date of any approved rental increase to commence at a reasonable time as determined by the Board. The Board must decide any hardship case within 60 days from the date of completion of application by the landlord, provided that all necessary and required documentation for said application has been submitted by the landlord to the hearing officer or the Board. 
D.	After the landlord has filed his or her application for an increase with all supporting documents and materials, no new material will be considered by the hearing officer or Board unless such new material is filed with the Board and notice identifying such new material and setting forth a description of such material is served upon each tenant no later than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing. Tenants who request a copy of the hardship file, and any new materials submitted to the Board or hearing officer, shall have one provided by the landlord at least five days prior to any hearing date. 
E.	The Board shall deny all or a part of the relief requested where specific findings of fact support the conclusion that the landlord purchase or operations are not reasonable, prudent and/or efficient. 
F.	The Board shall only include expenses that are reasonable, necessary and usual operating expenses. If an expense is not a usual yearly expense, the Board shall prorate the expense over a reasonable period of time based upon the history of the building and the actual useful life of the expense item. Any expenses connected with repairs and miscellaneous items shall be substantiated with bills and other documents for a twelve-month period prior to the application. No capital improvement or capital expenses shall be considered under this category. 
G.	Documentation presented by the landlord in the hardship application must include the following: 
(1)	The title closing statement or other proofs of purchase. 
(2)	Canceled checks or other proof of payment for all expenses claimed in the hardship application. 
(3)	All canceled checks or other proof of payment for all expenses claimed in the hardship application. 
(4)	All invoices, bills or other proof of work performed, supplies purchased and/or equipment purchased as claimed in the hardship application. 
(5)	A compilation statement of income and expenses relating to the subject property only for the preceding two years or from the date of acquisition of title if the property is owned for less than two years. 
(6)	Copies of those portions of tax returns relating to the property for the preceding two years or the period of the landlord's ownership if less than two years if filed. 
(7)	All mortgages and notes. 
(8)	The deed. 
(9)	Any other documents sought by the Rent Leveling Board and being relevant to the subject application and necessary to the Board's decisionmaking process. 
H.	Claimed expenses that are not supported by bills or invoices and canceled checks, money orders or appropriate proof of payment shall not be allowed. 
I.	If the Board determines that the landlord has withdrawn a part or all of his or her investment through refinancing or through any other means, then said withdrawal shall be deducted from the landlord's equity in real property investment unless used for the subject property. 
J.	If the Board determines that the landlord has unreasonably or excessively financed the property, then the Board may reasonably adjust the financing expense based upon market rates. 

§ 260-11. Rent Leveling Board established. [Amended 1-9-1986 by Ord. No. C-141; 3-12-1987 by Ord. No. C-429; 1-11-1995 by Ord. No. 94-137]
A.	There is created a Rent Leveling Board to assist the administration of this chapter. The Board shall consist of (7) members, all of whom shall be residents of the City of Jersey City. Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the Municipal Council. Two members shall be appointed for one year, three for two years, two for three years; and thereafter, each new member shall serve a term of three years and until his successor has been appointed and qualified. 
B.	The Mayor may also appoint two alternate members of the Board with the consent of the Municipal Council for a term of one year and until their successors are appointed and qualified. If any vacancy shall occur, other than the expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointments as above-provided for the unexpired term. 
C.	The members and alternate members of the Board shall, insofar as practicable, as a group, be representative of the affected interests in the city. 
D.	An alternate member shall be entitled to sit with and participate as a member in any meeting of or hearing before the Board. An alternate member who has attended the full hearing or hearings and all pertinent meetings may participate in the Board's determination during the absence or disqualification of any regular member. 
E.	No member or alternate member of the Rent Leveling Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interests. Members and alternate members may be removed for inefficiency, neglect of duty or malfeasance in office by the Mayor at his discretion after proper hearing. Any Board member or alternate member who is absent for three consecutive Board meetings shall automatically be removed from the Board. 
F.	All members of the Board must disclose any/all real estate holdings in Jersey City. 

§ 260-12. Powers of Rent Leveling Board.
A.	The Rent Leveling Board is granted and shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted, all powers necessary and appropriate to see that the purposes of this chapter are carried out and executed, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)	To issue and promulgate such procedural rules and regulations as it deems necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, which rules and regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or amended from time to time by the Board in the exercise of its discretion, provided that such rules are filed with the City Clerk. The Municipal Council may reject any rules of the Board within 60 days of the issuance of such rule and such rejected rule shall be deemed null and void and be of no force. 
(2)	To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help them comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)	To hold appeals hearings and adjudicate appeals from tenants for reduced rental in accordance with provisions of this chapter. 
(4)	To hold hearings for hardship, capital improvement and rent reduction applications in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.	The Board shall give both landlord and tenant reasonable opportunity to be heard before making any determination. All determinations of the Board must be approved as to law and form by the Corporation Counsel prior to release. All Board determinations must be in writing. 
C.	The Board may designate any one of the following persons as hearing officers to conduct hearings pursuant to this chapter: any one of its members or any person who was employed by the city to the position of hearing officer. Such hearing officer shall, within five days after the conclusion of the hearing, file a written report with the Board. Said report shall contain the names and addresses of the parties to the hearing, names and addresses of all witnesses other than parties who testified at the hearing, the detailed findings of fact and conclusions of law, a recommended decision and the detailed basis for the recommendation. Attached to the report shall be all documents and papers received in evidence and the tape recording or transcript of the hearing. A copy of the report alone shall be mailed or served upon each party to the hearing. The parties may file written exceptions to the report with the Board. However, no exceptions shall be considered by the Board unless the same has been filed with the Board within 10 days from the date the copy of the report is received by the party submitting the exceptions. The Board shall consider the report and any exceptions to said report and shall render a decision promptly to either adopt, reject or modify the hearing officer's recommended decision. 
[Amended 4-23-1987 by Ord. No. C-451]
D.	The final decision or order of the Board shall be in writing or stated in the record of the Board's proceedings. Findings of fact, if set forth by reference to the language of this chapter, shall be accompanied by a concise and explicit statement of the underlying facts supporting the findings. The parties shall be notified either personally or by certified mail of the final decision. 

§ 260-13. Appeal of Board's decision. [Amended 7-19-1991 by Ord. No. McC-340]
Both landlord and tenant may appeal the findings of any determination of the Board to a court of competent jurisdiction according to law. The landlord shall provide written notice to each tenant of any such appeal or complaint and shall certify to the Administrator that notice has been given. Failure to so certify in any case shall be a violation of this chapter punishable by a minimum fine of $100 and maximum penalties as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. 

§ 260-14. Required services; heating systems. [Amended 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 92-022]
A.	During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall maintain the same standards of service, heating, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment in the housing space and dwelling as he or she provided or was required to do by law or lease at the date the lease was entered into. 
B.	When services, care or maintenance or when the standards of service, heating, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment in the housing space or dwelling are not substantially maintained as specified above, any tenant may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for a decrease in rent. A copy of said application shall be served upon the landlord and all other tenants setting forth, in detail, the reasons for such applications. At least 20 days shall elapse before a hearing thereon can be set. 
C.	Conversion of a central heating system paid for by the landlord to an individual dwelling heating system unit paid for by the tenant shall be considered a reduction of services. Any landlord who makes such heating conversion shall notify his or her tenants of their entitlement to a rental decrease commensurate with the additional cost to the tenant. 
D.	The two-year period provided under § 260-7 within which a tenant may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for a decrease in rent based on reduction of service shall not commence until the landlord provides each tenant with written notice of a tenant's entitlement to a rent reduction based on the conversion. 

§ 260-15. Provisions retroactive.
No landlord shall after the effective date of this chapter charge any rents in excess of what he or she was receiving from the effective date of this chapter except for increases as authorized by this chapter; nor shall such landlord charge any rents in excess of what he or she was receiving on January 11, 1973, if such excess is in excess of the rental which is authorized by this chapter. 

§ 260-16. Computations to be rounded off.
In computing rental increases and surcharges as provided under this chapter, all amounts so computed may be rounded off to the nearest dollar in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. 

§ 260-17. Violations and penalties.
A violation of any provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to the filing with the Rent Leveling Board or the Administrator of any material misstatement of fact, shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, General Provisions, § 1-25. A violation affecting more than one tenant shall be considered a separate violation as to each tenant. 

§ 260-18. Construal of provisions.
This chapter being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes thereof. 

§ 260-19. When effective; other provisions supplemented.
A.	This chapter shall remain in effect until the Council determines, by ordinance, that rent control is no longer necessary in the City of Jersey City and that it is in the public interest to permit the unrestrained operation of the competitive rental market. 
B.	All provisions of Chapter 218, Multiple Dwellings, of the Jersey City Code as amended and supplemented by this chapter be and they are hereby readopted. 

§ 260-20. Nonoccupant owner registration of dwelling units. [Added 2-11-1988 by Ord. No. C-674]
A.	The nonoccupant owner of any dwelling of one to four units which is let or rented for residential use shall file a statement with the Rent Leveling Board registering such unit. 
B.	The statement shall contain: 
(1)	The total number of units in each dwelling rented, the address of each dwelling, the number of persons living in each dwelling unit, the number of rooms in each dwelling unit and the square footage of each dwelling unit. 
(2)	The home address and telephone number where the owner or an agent authorized to act on the owner's behalf with respect to the maintenance of the property can be reached during regular business hours. 
(3)	The address and telephone number of an agent capable of responding to or relaying emergency notices and messages concerning the dwelling at any time. 
C.	If the owner is a corporation or entity other than an individual, in addition to the information requested in Subsection B above, the statement shall also contain: 
(1)	The home address and telephone number of each principal owner as requested above. 
(2)	The address of the corporation and registered agent. 
D.	From November 1 through March 31 of each year, each telephone number listed in the registration statement shall be equipped with an answering device capable of receiving and recording messages from any tenant calling with regard to maintenance. 
E.	Owners shall file an amended statement within seven days of any change in the information required to be filed with the Rent Leveling Board. 
F.	Owners have 30 days after the effective date of this chapter to comply with its requirements. 
