Source: https://cityclerk.lacity.org/onlinedocs/2024/24-0124_rpt_hh_7-1-26.pdf
Retrieved: 2026-10-04T04:57:03.665781+00:00

File No. 24-0124 
 
HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS COMMITTEE REPORT relative to governing procedures for the 
marketing and tenant selection for newly constructed covenanted affordable housing units in unsubsidized, 
mixed income projects created through Transit Oriented Communities (TOC), Density Bonus and similar 
programs; and if changes will be necessitated by the roll out of the Comprehensive Online Affordable 
Housing Search System; and related matters. 
 
Recommendations for Council action: 
 
1. NOTE AND FILE the analysis and findings captured in the Los Angeles Housing Department 
(LAHD) report dated October 29, 2025, attached to the Council file, relative to governing 
procedures for the marketing and tenant selection for newly constructed covenanted affordable 
housing units in unsubsidized, mixed income projects created through TOC, Density Bonus and 
similar programs; and if changes will be necessitated by the roll out of the Comprehensive Online 
Affordable Housing Search System; and related matters. 
 
2. REQUEST the LAHD, with the assistance of other departments as needed, to report in 60 days on: 
the LAHD’s average turnaround times for application reviews and income verifications measured 
against current staff capacity; potential lease delays due to un clear processes; and ways to 
streamline lease up so the City can lease up more quickly. 
 
Fiscal Impact Statement:  Not applicable 
 
Community Impact Statement:  Yes 
For: 
Los Feliz Neighborhood Council 
Studio City Neighborhood Council 
Rampart Village Neighborhood Council 
 
SUMMARY 
 
At the meeting held on July 1, 2026, the Housing and Homelessness Committee considered a LAHD report 
relative to governing procedures for the marketing and tenant selection for newly constructed covenanted 
affordable housing units in unsubsidized, mixed income projects created through TOC, Density Bonus and 
similar programs; and if changes will be necessitated by the roll out of the Comprehensive Online 
Affordable Housing Search System; and related matters .  LAHD gave a presentation on the matter and 
answered questions from the Committee. 
 
After an opportunity for public comment was held, the Committee moved to note and file the LAHD report 
and requested the LAHD to report back as outlined above. This matter is now submitted to the Council for 
consideration. 
 
Respectfully Submitted,  
 
 
HOUSING AND HOMELESSNESS COMMITTEE 
 
MEMBER  VOTE 
RAMAN:  YES 
JURADO:  YES 
BLUMENFIELD:  YES 
HUTT:   YES 
McOSKER:  YES 
 
 
SG 7.1.26 
 
-NOT OFFICIAL UNTIL COUNCIL ACTS- 
