SOURCE: https://pub.njleg.state.nj.us/statutes/STATUTES-TEXT.zip
RETRIEVED: 2026-10-04T05:18:28.216884+00:00
EXTRACTION: Complete named section only from official STATUTES.TXT.

40:49-2.  Procedure for passage; "governing body" defined
	40:49-2.  Except as otherwise provided in R.S.40:49-6 and 40:49-12, the procedure for the passage of ordinances shall be as follows:

	a.  Every ordinance after being introduced and having passed a first reading, which first reading may be by title, shall be published in its entirety or by title or by title and summary at least once in a newspaper published and circulated in the municipality, if there be one, and if not, in a newspaper printed in the county and circulating in the municipality, together with a notice of the introduction thereof, the time and place when and where it will be further considered for final passage, a clear and concise statement prepared by the clerk of the governing body setting forth the purpose of the ordinance, and the time and place when and where a copy of the ordinance can be obtained without cost by any member of the general public who wants a copy of the ordinance.  If there be only one such publication the same shall be at least one week prior to the time fixed for further consideration for final passage. If there be more than one publication, the first shall be at least one week prior to the time fixed for further consideration for final passage.

	b.  At the time and place so stated in such publication, or at any time and place to which the meeting for the further consideration of the ordinance shall from time to time be adjourned, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard concerning the ordinance.  The opportunity to be heard shall include the right to ask pertinent questions concerning the ordinance by any resident of the municipality or any other person affected by the ordinance. Final passage thereof shall be at least 10 days after the first reading.

	c.  Upon the opening of the hearing, the ordinance shall be given a second reading, which reading may be by title, and thereafter, it may be passed with or without amendments, or rejected.  Prior to the said second reading, a copy of the ordinance shall be posted on the bulletin board or other place upon which public notices are customarily posted in the principal municipal building of the municipality, and copies of the ordinance shall be made available to members of the general public of the municipality who shall request such copies.  If any amendment be adopted, substantially altering the substance of the ordinance, the ordinance as so amended shall not be finally adopted until at least one week thereafter, and the ordinance as amended shall be read at a meeting of the governing body, which reading may be by title, and shall be published in its entirety or by title or by title and summary, together with a notice of the introduction, the time and place when and where a copy of the amended ordinance can be obtained without any cost by any member of the general public who desires a copy, a clear and concise statement prepared by the clerk of the governing body setting forth the purpose of the ordinance, and the time and place when and where the amended ordinance will be further considered for final passage, at least two days prior to the time so fixed.  At the time and place so fixed, or at any other meeting to which the further consideration of the amended ordinance may be adjourned, the governing body may proceed to pass the ordinance, as amended, or again amend it in the same manner.

	d.  Upon passage, every ordinance, or the title, or the title and a summary, together with a notice of the date of passage or approval, or both, shall be published at least once in a newspaper circulating in the municipality, if there be one, and if not, in a newspaper printed in the county and circulating in the municipality.  No other notice or procedure with respect to the introduction or passage of any ordinance shall be required.

	Nothing herein shall be construed to affect the provisions of R.S.40:49-7 to 40:49-12 or R.S.40:49-27.

	For the purposes of this section, "governing body" shall include any municipal or county agency, board or commission authorized by law to adopt ordinances.

	Amended 1955, c.121; 1962, c.28, s.1; 1973, c.329; 1995, c.259, s.6; 1996, c.113, s.7.

